Bioinformatics Algorithms and Techniques
Final Programming Project: A Small Sequence Mapper
Contents
1 Introduction ...................................................................................... 1
2 Project Description .............................................................................. 1
3 Program Interface and Data ................................................................... 2
4 Algorithmic Components ....................................................................... 3
5 Submission and Evaluation Criteria .......................................................... 3
1 Introduction
The goal of this final programming project is to implement a simple sequence mapper that aligns
short sequencing reads against a reference genome. Sequence mapping is a fundamental task in
bioinformatics and constitutes the first step in many genomic analysis pipelines. In this project,
students will design and implement a program that takes a set of sequencing reads in FASTQ
format and aligns them to a reference genome provided in FASTA format. The mapper must
identify approximate matches between each read and the genome, allowing a small number of
sequencing errors, as measured by edit distance. The resulting alignments must then be reported
in a simplified SAM-like format.
The project aims to integrate several algorithmic concepts studied throughout the course. In par-
ticular, students will need to consider efficient string-processing techniques, approximate string-
matching algorithms, and appropriate data structures for handling large biological datasets. Dif-
ferent implementation strategies are possible, ranging from straightforward approaches that scan
the genome directly to more sophisticated solutions that rely on indexing structures or seed-and-
extend techniques. Beyond correctness, the project also emphasizes algorithmic efficiency and
careful implementation. Students are encouraged to experiment with different approaches and
data structures to balance accuracy, runtime, and memory usage when processing real genomic
data.
2 Project Description
The goal of this project is to implement a simple sequence mapper that aligns short sequencing
reads against a reference genome. The program must read sequencing reads from a FASTQ file,
search for occurrences of these reads in a reference genome provided in FASTA format, and re-
port the resulting alignments in SAM format. The project focuses on the algorithmic problem of
approximate string matching between sequencing reads and a long genomic reference sequence.
Given a read P of length m and a reference genome G of length n, the program must identify posi-
tions in the genome where the read aligns with at most k errors. In this project, errors correspond
to the edit distance between the read and a substring of the reference genome (i.e., substitutions,
insertions, and deletions are allowed). The parameter k represents the maximum number of errors
permitted in an alignment and will be provided when executing the program.
For each read in the input dataset, the mapper must search the reference genome for candidate
alignments whose edit distance to the read is at most the specified threshold k. However, the
program should not report all such matches. Instead, it must report at most the two alignments
with the smallest edit distance among all valid matches. If only one valid alignment exists within
the error bound, only that alignment should be reported. If multiple alignments share the same
minimal distance, the program may report any two of them. During evaluation, the same program
will be executed multiple times with different values of k, typically ranging from k = 0 to k = 3.
1
When k = 0, the mapper must report only exact matches. For larger values of k, the program
must identify approximate matches that satisfy the error bound and select the two best alignments
according to their edit distance.
Students are free to choose the algorithms and data structures used to implement their mapper.
Possible strategies include direct genome scanning, indexing structures such as tries or suffix ar-
rays, seed-and-extend approaches, or dynamic programming-based alignment techniques. The
efficiency and clarity of the chosen implementation will be evaluated.
3 Program Interface and Data
To enable consistent evaluation of all submissions, every implementation must follow the same
command-line interface. The main executable program must be called mapper. Students are free
to design their implementation in different ways. The simplest approach is to perform the mapping
directly using the reference genome in FASTA format without building any auxiliary data structure.
In this case, the mapper reads the genome file, processes the sequencing reads, and reports the
resulting alignments. The parameter -R specifies the reference genome, -i specifies the FASTQ file
containing the sequencing reads, -o specifies the output SAM file where the alignments must be
written, and -k indicates the maximum number of allowed errors in the alignment.
mapper -R genome.fa -i input.fastq -o output.sam -k max-errors
Students who wish to accelerate the mapping process may implement an index over the reference
genome. In this case, the index construction must be performed by a separate program called
indexer. This program reads the reference genome in FASTA format and produces an index file
whose internal structure is defined by the student. The options -R and -I specify the reference
genome and the file where the index will be stored, respectively. The time required to build the
index will not be considered during evaluation and is assumed to be amortized across multiple
mapping runs.
indexer -R genome.fa -I genome.idx
mapper -I genome.idx -i input.fastq -o output.sam -k max-errors
The reference genome used in the project corresponds to the human reference assembly GRCh38
(primary assembly) distributed by Ensembl and available at Ensembl GRCh38 primary assembly.
Students should download and decompress this file before running their programs. Similarly, the
sequencing reads correspond to a real sequencing dataset available at ERR194147 FASTQ dataset.
For this project, only the first million reads (1M) of the dataset should be used. Since FASTQ
records consist of four lines per read, this subset can be obtained with the following command:
zcat ERR194147.fastq.gz | head -n 4000000 > reads_1M.fastq
The program must produce the alignments in SAM format. To simplify the project, students are
not required to implement the full SAM specification. Each alignment should be written as a
simplified SAM-like record containing only a small subset of fields. Each output line must contain
the read name, the reference sequence name (chromosome), the mapping position in the reference
genome, the CIGAR string describing the alignment, the read sequence, and the base quality string.
All other SAM fields, such as flags, mapping quality, mate information, and template length, are
not required and should be omitted.
If a read has two valid alignments within the error threshold k, the first alignment (the one with the
smallest edit distance) should be written in the main fields of the record. The second alignment,
if present, must be reported in an additional optional field at the end of the line. This field should
contain the reference sequence name, the mapping position, and the corresponding CIGAR string
of the secondary alignment. A typical output line produced by the mapper could therefore look as
follows:
2
read0001 chr1 10523 100M ACTGACTG FFFFFFFF ALT:chr7,88321,98M1I1M
In this example, the read read0001 aligns to chromosome chr1 at position 10523 with CIGAR string
100M. The sequence and quality string correspond to the original FASTQ read. The optional field
ALT:chr7,88321,98M1I1M indicates that a second alignment was also found on chromosome chr7
at position 88321 with the specified CIGAR description.
4 Algorithmic Components
The implementation can leverage algorithms covered in the course. The efficiency and complexity
of the implemented algorithms will be considered in the grading.
• Indexing data structures (e.g., Tries, Suffix Arrays, FM-index) for efficient searching.
• Approximate string matching using edit distance (Hamming/Levenshtein distance).
• Sequence alignment using dynamic programming.
Students may use Python or C++ for implementation. Using bioinformatics libraries such as
Biopython (Python) or SeqAn (C++) is allowed but not required.
5 Submission and Evaluation Criteria
Students (or groups of up to 3 students) must submit their source code, along with a brief docu-
mentation, to the professor’s email (santiago.marco@upc.edu). The submission should include a
short README file that explains how to compile and run the program, lists the required depen-
dencies, and provides a brief description of the implementation. The deadline for submission is
the 26th of April.
The project will be evaluated based on several aspects. First, the correctness of the implementation
will be verified by checking that the mapper produces valid alignments according to the project’s
specifications. Second, the efficiency of the solution will be considered, including both running
time and memory usage. In addition, the evaluation will take into account the sophistication
of the algorithmic techniques and data structures used in the implementation. Solutions that
demonstrate thoughtful algorithmic design, appropriate data structures, and careful engineering
will be positively valued. Students who produce a correct and complete solution that satisfies the
project requirements may obtain the maximum project grade.
In addition to this evaluation, a small competition will be organized among the submitted imple-
mentations. The fastest implementation when mapping the evaluation dataset will receive an ad-
ditional bonus of +1 point in the course’s final grade. A second bonus of +1 point will be awarded
to the implementation that achieves the smallest peak memory usage while performing the same
task. Students may submit two different implementations if they wish to compete independently
in the two categories. However, most students will typically submit a single implementation that
will automatically participate in both the running-time and memory-usage evaluations.